README.md, before:

# 🔐 nomonic

[![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-vibes-purple)](https://github.com/larkiny/nomonic)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](LICENSE)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.x-3178c6)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![Bash](https://img.shields.io/badge/Bash-3.2%2B-4EAA25)](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/)
[![API Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-API-informational)](https://larkiny.github.io/nomonic/)

> **Beta:** This project is experimental and still very much a WIP. APIs and behavior may change, and I'll definitely make enhancements to the detection mechanism to cover more edge cases.

Pre-commit hook that detects BIP39 mnemonic seed phrases in staged files and blocks the commit. Prevents accidental secret leaks that have historically led to exploits and big "uh-ohs", as they are technically referred to in the crypto space.

## 🚀 Quick Start

Run this from your project root:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/larkiny/nomonic/main/setup.sh | bash
```

That's it. The script will:

1. 🔍 **Detect your project type** — Node.js (`package.json`) or non-Node
2. 📦 **Install the right version** — TypeScript for Node.js projects, Bash for everything else
3. 🪝 **Configure git hooks** — Sets up Husky (Node.js) or raw git hooks, installing dependencies as needed
4. 🛡️ **Run on every commit** — Scans staged files before each `git commit`

## 💡 Why This Exists

You handle seed phrases during development. Testing wallets, integrating key management, debugging transactions - all the things. But one overconfident `git commit` later and that BIG SECRET THING is in your repo history forever (it's still kinda in the room with us even after you delete it).

It's happened before. nomonic is a pre-commit hook that catches seed phrases before they make it into version control. Or that's what I hope, anyway. Like GTA6, it's still coming along.

### How is this different from GitHub Push Protection?

[GitHub Push Protection](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/secret-scanning/introduction/about-push-protection) detects **structured secrets** — API keys, tokens, and private keys that have recognizable patterns like prefixes, checksums, or high-entropy signatures. It does not detect BIP39 seed phrases because a mnemonic is just a sequence of common English words with no structural fingerprint.

nomonic fills that gap. The two tools are complementary: Push Protection catches your API keys, nomonic catches your seed phrases.

| | GitHub Push Protection | nomonic |
|---|---|---|
| API keys & tokens | ✅ | ❌ |
| BIP39 seed phrases | ❌ | ✅ |
| Runs | Server-side (on push) | Client-side (pre-commit) |
| Requires | GitHub Advanced Security | Nothing (zero dependencies) |

## ⚙️ How It Works

The detector scans `git diff --cached` (staged changes) for sequences of consecutive words from the [BIP39 English wordlist](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt) (2048 common English words). The core methodology:

1. **Tokenization with punctuation stripping** — Each token is stripped of surrounding non-alphabetic characters (quotes, commas, brackets, numbering like `1.`, etc.) before matching. This catches seed phrases in any common formatting. Tokens with _interior_ punctuation (hyphens, apostrophes) are disqualified entirely — this is the primary false-positive defense, since normal English prose contains contractions (`they're`) and compound words (`open-source`) that would otherwise match.

2. **Single-line detection** — Finds runs of consecutive BIP39 words within each line. Non-BIP39 words reset the counter. This handles space-separated, comma-separated, JSON array, and inline numbered formats.

3. **Cross-line detection** — Accumulates BIP39 words across consecutive lines where _every_ meaningful token is a BIP39 word ("BIP39-pure" lines). Blank lines and lines containing only annotation labels (like `Word 1:` or `Recovery phrase:`) are transparent — they don't break or contribute to a sequence. This catches one-per-line, numbered list, and grid formats.

4. **Threshold gating** — A violation is only reported when 5 or more consecutive BIP39 words are found (configurable via `BIP39_THRESHOLD`). Since the BIP39 wordlist contains common English words, shorter sequences occur naturally in prose.

This catches standard 12/24-word BIP39 mnemonics as well as legacy 25-word Algorand account mnemonics (which use the same wordlist).

## ⚠️ Limitations

nomonic is a best-effort safety net, not a guarantee. Known limitations:

- 🌐 **Only detects English BIP39 words** — BIP39 defines wordlists for multiple languages (Japanese, Spanish, Chinese, etc.). This tool only checks the English list.
- 🔓 **Pre-commit hook is bypassable** — `git commit --no-verify` skips all hooks. The full-repo scanner (`scan-repo`) can be used in CI to catch what hooks miss.
- 📋 **Staged diffs only (hook mode)** — The pre-commit hook only scans newly added/modified lines. Seed phrases already in the repository history are not caught. Use `scan-repo` for full-repo auditing.
- 🔀 **Obfuscated phrases are not detected** — Seed words that are base64-encoded, encrypted, split across variables, reversed, or otherwise transformed will not be caught.
- 🚨 **False positives are possible** — The BIP39 wordlist contains common English words (`abandon`, `ability`, `access`, `art`, `carbon`, `code`, etc.). Technical documentation or prose that happens to use 5+ consecutive BIP39 words will trigger a block. Raise the threshold or use `--no-verify` for legitimate cases.
- 🕳️ **False negatives are possible** — Seed phrases with unusual formatting not covered by the tokenizer (e.g., tab-separated without spaces, embedded in URLs, mixed with non-whitespace delimiters) may not be detected.
- 🔢 **No checksum validation** — The detector does not verify that the word sequence forms a valid BIP39 mnemonic with correct checksum. It flags any run of BIP39 words meeting the threshold, whether or not it's a valid key.

### 🎯 Detected formats

| Format                        | Example                                                               |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Space-separated               | `abandon ability able about above`                                    |
| Comma-separated               | `abandon, ability, able, about, above`                                |
| Quoted CSV                    | `"abandon", "ability", "able", "about", "above"`                      |
| JSON arrays                   | `["abandon", "ability", "able", "about", "above"]`                    |
| Numbered (single line)        | `1. abandon 2. ability 3. able 4. about 5. above`                     |
| Numbered (multi-line)         | `1. force`<br>`2. clay`<br>`3. airport`<br>`...`                      |
| Grid layout (Algorand wallet) | `1. force 2. clay 3. airport`<br>`4. shoot 5. fence 6. fine`<br>`...` |
| Plain one-per-line            | `force`<br>`clay`<br>`airport`<br>`...`                               |
| Blank-separated blocks        | `abandon ability`<br><br>`able about above`                           |
| Annotated one-per-line        | `Word 1: abandon`<br>`Word 2: ability`<br>`...`                       |
| Labeled phrases               | `mnemonic: abandon ability able about above`                          |

### 🔬 What gets scanned

- ✅ All staged text files (added/modified lines only)
- ⏭️ Lock files are skipped (`package-lock.json`, `yarn.lock`, etc.)
- ⏭️ Binary files are skipped

### 🚫 What triggers a block

5 or more consecutive words that are all:

- Present in the [BIP39 English wordlist](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt) (2048 words)
- Purely alphabetic after stripping surrounding punctuation
- Free of interior punctuation (hyphens, apostrophes, etc.)

Common seed-labeling words (`word`, `words`, `mnemonic`, `seed`, `phrase`, `key`, `backup`, `recovery`, `secret`, `passphrase`) are treated as transparent — they don't break or contribute to a BIP39 sequence. This catches formats like `Word 1: abandon` without false-flagging documentation that mentions "seed phrase" in prose.

## 🔎 Full Repository Scan

For CI pipelines or manual auditing, scan all tracked files (not just staged changes):

### TypeScript

```bash
pnpm exec tsx scripts/nomonic/scan-repo.ts
```

### Bash

```bash
bash scripts/nomonic/scan-repo.sh
```

### Options

| Flag                  | Description                                     |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `--git`               | (Default) Scan git-tracked files                |
| `--dir <path>`        | Scan all files in directory recursively         |
| `--include-lockfiles` | Include lockfiles in scan (excluded by default) |
| `--threshold <n>`     | Override detection threshold (default: 5)       |
| `--json`              | Output violations as JSON (TypeScript only)     |

## 🎛️ Configuration

Adjust the detection threshold via environment variable:

```bash
# Require 8+ consecutive words instead of the default 5
export BIP39_THRESHOLD=8
```

## 🔓 Bypassing

For legitimate cases (e.g., committing the detector files themselves on first install):

```bash
git commit --no-verify
```

## 🔄 Updating

Re-run the setup command to pull the latest detector files:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/larkiny/nomonic/main/setup.sh | bash
```

The script is idempotent — it won't duplicate hook entries.

## 🗑️ Uninstalling

1. Remove the BIP39 check line from your pre-commit hook:
   - **Husky:** Edit `.husky/pre-commit`, delete the `npx tsx scripts/nomonic/check-staged.ts` line
   - **Git hooks:** Edit `.git/hooks/pre-commit`, delete the `./scripts/nomonic/check-bip39-seeds.sh` line
2. Delete the detector files:
   - **TypeScript:** `rm -rf scripts/nomonic/`
   - **Bash:** `rm -rf scripts/nomonic/`

## 📁 What's in the repo

```
bash/
  check-bip39-seeds.sh     # Standalone bash detector (zero dependencies)
  scan-repo.sh             # Full-repo scanner (zero dependencies)
ts/
  wordlist.ts              # BIP39 English wordlist as a Set
  detect.ts                # Core detection algorithm
  detect.test.ts           # Unit tests (vitest)
  check-staged.ts          # CLI entry point (pre-commit hook)
  check-staged.test.ts     # Integration tests (vitest)
  scan-repo.ts             # Full-repo scanner CLI
  scan-repo.test.ts        # Scanner tests (vitest)
setup.sh                   # One-command installer
```

## 📄 License

MIT

Commit message:

chore: switch license from MIT to The Unlicense

README.md, after:

# 🔐 nomonic

[![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-vibes-purple)](https://github.com/larkiny/nomonic)
[![License: Unlicense](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Unlicense-blue)](LICENSE)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.x-3178c6)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![Bash](https://img.shields.io/badge/Bash-3.2%2B-4EAA25)](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/)
[![API Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-API-informational)](https://larkiny.github.io/nomonic/)

> **Beta:** This project is experimental and still very much a WIP. APIs and behavior may change, and I'll definitely make enhancements to the detection mechanism to cover more edge cases.

Pre-commit hook that detects BIP39 mnemonic seed phrases in staged files and blocks the commit. Prevents accidental secret leaks that have historically led to exploits and big "uh-ohs", as they are technically referred to in the crypto space.

## 🚀 Quick Start

Run this from your project root:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/larkiny/nomonic/main/setup.sh | bash
```

That's it. The script will:

1. 🔍 **Detect your project type** — Node.js (`package.json`) or non-Node
2. 📦 **Install the right version** — TypeScript for Node.js projects, Bash for everything else
3. 🪝 **Configure git hooks** — Sets up Husky (Node.js) or raw git hooks, installing dependencies as needed
4. 🛡️ **Run on every commit** — Scans staged files before each `git commit`

## 💡 Why This Exists

You handle seed phrases during development. Testing wallets, integrating key management, debugging transactions - all the things. But one overconfident `git commit` later and that BIG SECRET THING is in your repo history forever (it's still kinda in the room with us even after you delete it).

It's happened before. nomonic is a pre-commit hook that catches seed phrases before they make it into version control. Or that's what I hope, anyway. Like GTA6, it's still coming along.

### How is this different from GitHub Push Protection?

[GitHub Push Protection](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/secret-scanning/introduction/about-push-protection) detects **structured secrets** — API keys, tokens, and private keys that have recognizable patterns like prefixes, checksums, or high-entropy signatures. It does not detect BIP39 seed phrases because a mnemonic is just a sequence of common English words with no structural fingerprint.

nomonic fills that gap. The two tools are complementary: Push Protection catches your API keys, nomonic catches your seed phrases.

| | GitHub Push Protection | nomonic |
|---|---|---|
| API keys & tokens | ✅ | ❌ |
| BIP39 seed phrases | ❌ | ✅ |
| Runs | Server-side (on push) | Client-side (pre-commit) |
| Requires | GitHub Advanced Security | Nothing (zero dependencies) |

## ⚙️ How It Works

The detector scans `git diff --cached` (staged changes) for sequences of consecutive words from the [BIP39 English wordlist](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt) (2048 common English words). The core methodology:

1. **Tokenization with punctuation stripping** — Each token is stripped of surrounding non-alphabetic characters (quotes, commas, brackets, numbering like `1.`, etc.) before matching. This catches seed phrases in any common formatting. Tokens with _interior_ punctuation (hyphens, apostrophes) are disqualified entirely — this is the primary false-positive defense, since normal English prose contains contractions (`they're`) and compound words (`open-source`) that would otherwise match.

2. **Single-line detection** — Finds runs of consecutive BIP39 words within each line. Non-BIP39 words reset the counter. This handles space-separated, comma-separated, JSON array, and inline numbered formats.

3. **Cross-line detection** — Accumulates BIP39 words across consecutive lines where _every_ meaningful token is a BIP39 word ("BIP39-pure" lines). Blank lines and lines containing only annotation labels (like `Word 1:` or `Recovery phrase:`) are transparent — they don't break or contribute to a sequence. This catches one-per-line, numbered list, and grid formats.

4. **Threshold gating** — A violation is only reported when 5 or more consecutive BIP39 words are found (configurable via `BIP39_THRESHOLD`). Since the BIP39 wordlist contains common English words, shorter sequences occur naturally in prose.

This catches standard 12/24-word BIP39 mnemonics as well as legacy 25-word Algorand account mnemonics (which use the same wordlist).

## ⚠️ Limitations

nomonic is a best-effort safety net, not a guarantee. Known limitations:

- 🌐 **Only detects English BIP39 words** — BIP39 defines wordlists for multiple languages (Japanese, Spanish, Chinese, etc.). This tool only checks the English list.
- 🔓 **Pre-commit hook is bypassable** — `git commit --no-verify` skips all hooks. The full-repo scanner (`scan-repo`) can be used in CI to catch what hooks miss.
- 📋 **Staged diffs only (hook mode)** — The pre-commit hook only scans newly added/modified lines. Seed phrases already in the repository history are not caught. Use `scan-repo` for full-repo auditing.
- 🔀 **Obfuscated phrases are not detected** — Seed words that are base64-encoded, encrypted, split across variables, reversed, or otherwise transformed will not be caught.
- 🚨 **False positives are possible** — The BIP39 wordlist contains common English words (`abandon`, `ability`, `access`, `art`, `carbon`, `code`, etc.). Technical documentation or prose that happens to use 5+ consecutive BIP39 words will trigger a block. Raise the threshold or use `--no-verify` for legitimate cases.
- 🕳️ **False negatives are possible** — Seed phrases with unusual formatting not covered by the tokenizer (e.g., tab-separated without spaces, embedded in URLs, mixed with non-whitespace delimiters) may not be detected.
- 🔢 **No checksum validation** — The detector does not verify that the word sequence forms a valid BIP39 mnemonic with correct checksum. It flags any run of BIP39 words meeting the threshold, whether or not it's a valid key.

### 🎯 Detected formats

| Format                        | Example                                                               |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Space-separated               | `abandon ability able about above`                                    |
| Comma-separated               | `abandon, ability, able, about, above`                                |
| Quoted CSV                    | `"abandon", "ability", "able", "about", "above"`                      |
| JSON arrays                   | `["abandon", "ability", "able", "about", "above"]`                    |
| Numbered (single line)        | `1. abandon 2. ability 3. able 4. about 5. above`                     |
| Numbered (multi-line)         | `1. force`<br>`2. clay`<br>`3. airport`<br>`...`                      |
| Grid layout (Algorand wallet) | `1. force 2. clay 3. airport`<br>`4. shoot 5. fence 6. fine`<br>`...` |
| Plain one-per-line            | `force`<br>`clay`<br>`airport`<br>`...`                               |
| Blank-separated blocks        | `abandon ability`<br><br>`able about above`                           |
| Annotated one-per-line        | `Word 1: abandon`<br>`Word 2: ability`<br>`...`                       |
| Labeled phrases               | `mnemonic: abandon ability able about above`                          |

### 🔬 What gets scanned

- ✅ All staged text files (added/modified lines only)
- ⏭️ Lock files are skipped (`package-lock.json`, `yarn.lock`, etc.)
- ⏭️ Binary files are skipped

### 🚫 What triggers a block

5 or more consecutive words that are all:

- Present in the [BIP39 English wordlist](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt) (2048 words)
- Purely alphabetic after stripping surrounding punctuation
- Free of interior punctuation (hyphens, apostrophes, etc.)

Common seed-labeling words (`word`, `words`, `mnemonic`, `seed`, `phrase`, `key`, `backup`, `recovery`, `secret`, `passphrase`) are treated as transparent — they don't break or contribute to a BIP39 sequence. This catches formats like `Word 1: abandon` without false-flagging documentation that mentions "seed phrase" in prose.

## 🔎 Full Repository Scan

For CI pipelines or manual auditing, scan all tracked files (not just staged changes):

### TypeScript

```bash
pnpm exec tsx scripts/nomonic/scan-repo.ts
```

### Bash

```bash
bash scripts/nomonic/scan-repo.sh
```

### Options

| Flag                  | Description                                     |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `--git`               | (Default) Scan git-tracked files                |
| `--dir <path>`        | Scan all files in directory recursively         |
| `--include-lockfiles` | Include lockfiles in scan (excluded by default) |
| `--threshold <n>`     | Override detection threshold (default: 5)       |
| `--json`              | Output violations as JSON (TypeScript only)     |

## 🎛️ Configuration

Adjust the detection threshold via environment variable:

```bash
# Require 8+ consecutive words instead of the default 5
export BIP39_THRESHOLD=8
```

## 🔓 Bypassing

For legitimate cases (e.g., committing the detector files themselves on first install):

```bash
git commit --no-verify
```

## 🔄 Updating

Re-run the setup command to pull the latest detector files:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/larkiny/nomonic/main/setup.sh | bash
```

The script is idempotent — it won't duplicate hook entries.

## 🗑️ Uninstalling

1. Remove the BIP39 check line from your pre-commit hook:
   - **Husky:** Edit `.husky/pre-commit`, delete the `npx tsx scripts/nomonic/check-staged.ts` line
   - **Git hooks:** Edit `.git/hooks/pre-commit`, delete the `./scripts/nomonic/check-bip39-seeds.sh` line
2. Delete the detector files:
   - **TypeScript:** `rm -rf scripts/nomonic/`
   - **Bash:** `rm -rf scripts/nomonic/`

## 📁 What's in the repo

```
bash/
  check-bip39-seeds.sh     # Standalone bash detector (zero dependencies)
  scan-repo.sh             # Full-repo scanner (zero dependencies)
ts/
  wordlist.ts              # BIP39 English wordlist as a Set
  detect.ts                # Core detection algorithm
  detect.test.ts           # Unit tests (vitest)
  check-staged.ts          # CLI entry point (pre-commit hook)
  check-staged.test.ts     # Integration tests (vitest)
  scan-repo.ts             # Full-repo scanner CLI
  scan-repo.test.ts        # Scanner tests (vitest)
setup.sh                   # One-command installer
```

## 📄 License

[The Unlicense](LICENSE) — public domain. Do whatever you want with it.
